---
layout: post
author:
- Ali Khudiyev
title: "Internet Club Culture"
date: 2025-10-29 15:40:00 +0400
categories: blog fun gaming
---

Internet cafe, you say? No, we call it an *internet club*. In my
opinion, calling it an internet cafe makes it sound like a place that
serves light drinks and/or food for people to come and hang out, which
is, by the way, the case in many European countries such as France. You
typically see internet cafes that serve a beer and have large screen TVs
placed in front of sofas or couches to let people play video games on
PlayStation or Xbox while sipping their beers. In the Middle East, where
I have grown up, we have internet clubs. An internet club is a place
that unites casual and sometimes even professional gamers together for
one single purpose: to play video games! It's a well-established culture
around here. Internet club is not a place you go to have a beer and play
chill PS/Xbox games with a controller, although there are many internet
clubs that also provide that option for people, as well. However, the
core of what an internet club is is a room packed with cutting-edge
computer hardware to play (mostly competitive) video games in ultra-high
FPS, low lags, no slowdowns due to fast internet, and maxxed out
toxicity levels. Don't get me wrong, such internet clubs also do serve
light beverages and sandwiches, but almost no one goes to these places
to eat or drink; you usually just buy soda or something to stay hydrated
in between the intense moments of your gaming experience.

Yeah... It is true that there are also a few people coming to an
internet club to watch a movie or just surf the web casually, but this
is fine since they are in the minority. Most of the guys are like-minded
toxic gamers, add or take. By using "maxxed toxicity" or "toxic gamers"
I don't want to scare anyone who hasn't had the honor to experience what
it is like to go to an internet club. The toxicity among even casual
gamers like me is often a myth. I mean, yes, it does exist and may make
you angry and hate the experience of multiplayer gaming, but if you
haven't learned to love the feeling of uttermost hatred, then playing
competitive multiplayer games may not be for you. You should be able to
improvise, adapt, and overcome the toxicity by being even more toxic
sometimes. Mastering this requires mastering one's own control over
one's emotions and IQ levels. It is a hard thing to do because being
toxic to untoxisize other toxic players sometimes requires lowering your
IQ while maintaining high emotional intelligence (EQ) to not get burnt
in the flame you lit.

You may light the flame by being toxic to other players online, but the
burn won't have a physical smell in the club. So, no one sitting in the
internet club will really know about what you have done or how toxic you
have become. What does (or at least used to) have a real smell in
internet clubs is the smell of burning cigarettes. Ah, that smell that
our generation grew up breathing into our lungs... that smell that to
our cloths and made our parents become suspicious of us for smoking
cigarettes outside... that smell that helped us get an inch closer to
catching a lung cancer from the young ages... My descriptions of this
feeling, which I have right now, do nothing but fall short of explaining
the feeling well enough. I am like a kid whose tongue got caught up in
between explaining how good a nostalgic feeling of the smell of a
cigarette that others constantly smoked around you can get, and
mentioning how bad it is for your health, even worse than the people
smoking them cigarettes. I still go to internet clubs, but the
consistency has been fading away due to the life matters one should deal
with growing up. Sometimes it is the memories of good old times that we
reminisce about that make us appreciate the culture we have been a part
of.

These places that we call internet clubs are really more like esports
clubs or esports cafes, but I'll probably continue calling them internet
clubs until the end of my non-profit casual gaming career. Not because
of my inner gamer toxicity, but because the reader -- you -- are
probably as dumb as yo mama, who strikes oil when she wears high heels
because she so fat. Did you reckon the drop in the IQ while maintaining
a moderately stabilized EQ during the insult? I did it just for
illustration purposes, so please do not take the insult seriously. To
close it up on a good note, I will end it with <a target="_blank" href="https://youtu.be/l7qDHE1PEGA?si=S8j_y2mwQSAOllLy">this song</a>.
