---
layout: post
author:
- Ali Khudiyev
title: "Drama of Academia"
date: 2025-10-28 20:45:00 +0400
categories: blog academia
---

*Academia...* The place to serve enlightenment for all... Or is it? How
much longer will we keep pretending that academia is "the home of
science"? The home of science is where the science happens, where one
discovers or invents something new. Academia is not that place -- to the
extent that there are way more going on in academia than "just a
science, guys" stuff. I am not even sure what academia is all about --
is it to indoctrinate people to become well-behaved citizens, or is it
to expand one's capabilities so they can work under some capitalist, or
both? It's hard to tell...

Academia is just another construct invented to control people. It is
essentially a profit-making system, except that the profit being made
here is not always directly tied to the cash in obvious ways, but also
to something more evilish in the long term. Guess what that might be. It
is to *control* masses. The money game in the profit-making business
plays a significantly huge role in controlling people, obviously, but
there is another route that is also exploited by control freaks to
ensure that money is not the only way of controlling others and to
impose even further non-repressive restrictions on people to make them
work and serve the controlling class more and more.

The *drama of academia* is in its hidden incentives disguised as the
service to the science and enlightenment of individuals. Very
unfortunately, academia has played a major role in taking people's
*freedom of thought* away. Instead, people have been brainwashed to
believe in the *freedom of speech* -- a freedom, presence or absence of
which makes no difference when granted to a herd of sheep. The point is,
if you don't know how to think or what to think *freely, independently,
and critically*, your words won't carry too much weight or make a
difference anyway, so you might as well give them that sort of freedom
and take the one that actually matters. Lastly, to expand one's point of
view a little further on the purposes of academia, I would recommend
reading about the <a target="_blank" href="https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/althusser/1970/ideology.htm">Idealogical State Apparatus
(ISA)</a>
by Louis Althusser, in which the philosopher argues how institutions
(e.g., schools, media, religion, family) are used to legitimize the
ruling class's values and social norms through consent and subtle
methods unlike the *repressive state appartus (RSA)*.

The *fall of academia* may seem like an impossibility, especially when
many parents are huge believers in putting their children through many
years of brainwashing. However, the fall is nearer than it was before --
with more and more people realizing how much of a waste of time it is to
keep climbing higher in the pyramid of academia. More people realize
that the tip of the pyramid is the bottom of the best lives they could
be living if they did not sacrifice it to the academic system. This
paragraph, talking about the indoctrination of pupils and students, just
reminded me of this good old Pink Floyd cover: <a target="_blank" href="https://youtu.be/uLMobfyKB9o?si=lRxdKwF-_vBZvwda">Another Brick In The
Wall</a>, the title of
which refers to someone being insignificant part of a larger, often
oppressive, system; how individuals are molded by social institutions
like oppressive schools and abusive authority figures, becoming like
bricks that collectively build a metaphorical "wall" of comformity and
alienation.

No one has to buy what I have said here, obviously. I also do not mean
that academia is "purely evil" and that nothing good can come out of it.
What I am saying is that it is not exactly what I used to think it was,
which might also be what many people still think of academia. It is a
good exercise to think about some of the common issues that keep
happening in academia, with a good attitude to propose solutions. Some
of the issues that just came to my mind are the following:

1.  Why are pupils and students still being penalized for not attending
    their classes?

2.  Why are pupils and students judged badly for asking "stupid"
    questions during their classes?

3.  Why is an academic *supposed* to struggle financially? In the case
    of researchers, is it because the discovery of something new is so
    cheap and easy thing to do, or in the case of teachers, is it
    because the value of helping students to become smart and critical
    thinkers is so low?

4.  Why do pupils and students get lower grades for correctly solving an
    exam problem when using a different technique than what they were
    taught by their teachers?

5.  Why are there so many teachers incompetent or unwilling to fulfill
    their duties? Why are there so many researchers like that, too?
    Could lower paychecks be one of the reasons, keeping the level of
    scientific progress and individual enlightenment under control?

6.  Why does the quantity of papers published matter *seriously* for
    researchers? Why does the number of subjects with maxxed out exam
    grades matter *seriously* for a student? Don't we have better things
    to do, such as publishing high-quality papers or understanding one
    subject very deeply?

7.  Why are academics judged badly for what they wear or how they
    appear, regardless of the scientific work they have done?

8.  Why is there too much meaning put behind the peer-reviewed
    publications when many of the peer reviews fail miserably at judging
    the correctness of the work done?

9.  Why do almost all the pupils and students lose interest in science
    after getting out of academia?

10. Why do schools and universities care about statistics of their
    internal examination scores, admission and graduation numbers,
    publication numbers, and QS rankings, more than their education
    level, quality of publications, complaints by their students, and so
    on?

Having spent the last 20 years of his life in academia, I know that it
is hard to build even a nearly-perfect academia. Rebuilding academia
might as well require rebuilding the whole state structure, which puts
it in perspective how hard it is to make good, big things good and big.
Scale affects almost everything that can be affected in any possible way
-- the number of bad actors increases, the system is exploited as a
m$\times$therf$\times$cker, everyone loses hope and good faith, good
actors slowly become worse, and the whole thing starts to sink harder
than the Titanic, but in a slower fashion. So, my safest bet has been to
do my own science, independently, for my own pleasure, and not care
about what most of the other "special group of smart people from
academia", that I am currently surrounded by would say or think about
what I do.

<a target="_blank" href="https://youtu.be/7VONqUbx3r8?si=QtUq8SOaTBcdS52A">Good luck, folks!</a>
