---
layout: post
author:
- Ali Khudiyev
title: "0, 1, and beyond"
date: 2023-08-07 19:12:00 +0400
categories: archive math finding
---

# Timeline

I decided to start writing a book called \"Introduction to Mathematics\"
on 21st of August 2019. This book was supposed to introduce fundamental
mathematical concepts to a layman who never really explicitly studied
any math. However, of course, it had to explain not any mathematical
concepts but my mathematical concepts. Here is the table of contents of
the unfinished book:

1.  Object

2.  Number

3.  Operations

4.  Expression and Function

5.  Set

6.  Relativity

7.  Ball Experiment

8.  Logic and Memory

9.  Continuity and Movement

10. Classification

I stopped writing it for a while before making some developments again
on February and August 2020. To give a brief overview of the
\"finished\" (but also clearly draft) parts of the book, I talked about
data (or information) that constitutes every observable object; then I
tried to use the notion of this \"objectness\" to define numbers;
addition, subtraction, and multiplication/division were of interest in
the following chapter of operations; I defined and distinguished the
concepts of an expression and a function by introducing
the substitution operation; then a set was defined as a collection of
any type of data; by jumping to the classification, I talked about
assembling and disassembling objects by analyzing information (or the
so-called data particles) that constitute them. Unfortunately, when I
look back at the chapters that I didn't even start writing I don't
exactly remember what was my thought process and what I was exactly
thinking writing about at that moment when I named them. Good part is
that at least I have some (biased) guesses.

In this blog post, I wish to bring back some of the concepts such as
objects, numbers and operations from that book and add a little bit of
retrospective window to it. Please note that in the following section
and its subsections, I may not only modify my old notations a bit when
convenient but I may also use some set-theoretic notions and notations
to illustrate the similarities between the two -- my concepts and
set-theoretic concepts.

# Introduction to Mathematics

## Object

When we think of an object in the real world we certainly do think of
its intrinsic characteristics. However, this is not the only thing that
we think of -- we also (even maybe unintentionally and forcefully) think
of its surroundings. For example, when we look at an apple sitting on a
table, we may focus on the apple (and its properties) as our main object
and table as its surroundings (or its supportive evidence). This natural
intuition has brought a new notion of an object which is given as
follows: an object is something defined by its primary and secondary
definitions.

$$\forall O\ \text{Object}(O) \iff \exists P, S\ \text{Definition}(p_{\in P}) \land \text{Definition}(s_{\in S}) \land O = (P, S)$$

Here $p$ describes the intrinsic characteristics of the object and $s$
describes its extrinsic or \"place-like\" characteristics. To bring back
the \"an apple on the table\" example, although we could zoom in on the
apple to only visually see it and nothing else, then there are two
possibilities:

We could pick some part of the apple as $p$ and the rest as $s$, and
therefore, lose the notion of the apple as a whole.

We could pick the whole apple as $p$ and leave $s$ empty since there is
nothing left to be picked, and therefore, lose the notion of
its identity.

Now, let me explain what just happened. Every object has the essence of
two types of things: property and identity. Property is intrinsic to the
object, so, it is given by the primary definition. Identity is extrinsic
to the object, so, its given by the secondary definition. For example,
if there were two apples on the table then their properties would be the
same but not their identities since one is sitting on one side of the
table and the other on the the other side. In the natural language, we
name things according to their (intrinsic) properties and
identify/distinguish them (from one another) by their (extrinsic)
identities. Now, this whole notion of objectness should make more sense
hopefully.

## Number

First, we need to acknowledge the following axiom:

$$\forall O = (P, S)\ \text{Object}(O) \iff \exists \top\ (\top \subset P)$$

which states that there exists a presence of any kind of observable
property (i.e., $\top = \{\varnothing\}$ and therefore,
$P = \{p, \varnothing\}$ but $\varnothing$ will be omitted to reduce
repetition) that is common in all places. Let's look at some numbers
then:

$$0 = (\{p\}, \varnothing)$$

$$1 = (\{p\}, \{s\})$$

$$2 = (\{p\}, \{s, s^\prime\})$$

For example, the number 2's object definition states that there exists a
$p$-characteristic object in $s$-characteristic place and another
$p$-characteristic object in $s^\prime$-characteristic place. $p$ and
$s$ could be any sentence in the first-order logic such as
$p = \text{Red}(x) \land \text{Round}(x)$ and $s = \text{OnTable}(x)$
for the number $n(x)$ (note that $x$ here refers to an \"apple\").

### Pure numbers

Besides representing grounded or impure numbers, we can also represent
the basic fundamental existence (i.e., the presence of anything) by
using the commonality-characteristic $\top$.

$$0 = (\top, \varnothing)$$

$$1 = (\top, \{s\})$$

$$2 = (\top, \{s, s^\prime\})$$

For example, the (pure) number 2's object definition states that there
exists something in $s$-characteristic place and something in
$s^\prime$-characteristic place. Although this looks a bit similar to
the impure numbers, the difference is how we have abstracted away the
primary definitions of objects, and now every pure number is similar to
its secondary definition, i.e., $n \sim s(n)$ where $s(n)$ is the
secondary definition of number $n$ (and for this matter, $p(n)$ is the
primary definition of $n$).

## Operations

The essence of any operation is a consequence of acting or operating on
a piece of information. In this section, I will use $O = (P, S)$
notation to indicate that $P$ and $S$ are actually sets of primary and
secondary definitions of the object $O$ respectively.

### Defining addition

Adding some number of something to some other number of the same thing
is intuitive and straightforward thing to understand. Addition on two
such numbers is defined as shown below:

$$(P, S) + (P, S^\prime) = (P, S \cup S^\prime)$$

where the primary definition obviously remains the same and the
secondary definition of the new number is now logically interpreted as
$\bigwedge_{s \in S \cap S^\prime} \texttt{id}_{P}(s)$ where
$\texttt{id}_{P}(s) \equiv \text{'}P\ \text{is identified by}\ s\text{'}$.
Here single quotation marks ($\text{'...'}$) mean that we do not have to
evaluate the expression in between logically, and instead, it must be
evaluated syntactically (i.e., by symbolic substitution).

There is no equivalent of $(P, S) + (P^\prime, S)$ and
$(P, S) + (P^\prime, S^\prime)$ since the primary definitions are
different for the two numbers, so adding them does not make sense.
However, one could make the following case:

$$(P, S) + (P^\prime, S^\prime) = (P \cup P^\prime, S \cup S^\prime)$$

where the primary definition of the new number is logically interpreted
as $\bigvee_{p \in P \cup P^\prime} p$ (where $\varnothing$ is
interpreted as false). Even though this could be possible, the following
addition still would not make sense unless we combine the
characteristics altogether:

$$(P, S) + (P^\prime, S) = (\bigvee_{p \in P} p \land \bigvee_{p^\prime \in P^\prime} p^\prime, S) = (\overline{\overline{P} \cap \overline{P^\prime}}, S)$$

where $\overline{P}$ and $\overline{P^\prime}$ are the complementary
sets of $P$ and $P^\prime$ respectively (if such a thing exists).

### Defining subtraction

Similar to the addition, it is relatively easy to define subtraction on
numbers with the same properties. Subtraction on such numbers is defined
as follows:

$$(P, S) - (P, S^\prime) = (P, S \setminus S^\prime)$$

whose secondary definition is interpreted as 

$$\bigwedge_{s \in S} (s \in S^\prime \iff \lnot \texttt{id}_{P}(s)) \models \forall s \in S\ \forall s^\prime \in S^\prime\ s \neq s^\prime \implies \texttt{id}_{P}(s)$$

The entailed sentence perfectly matches the true sentence directly
derived from the definition of the number which is
$\bigwedge_{s \in S \setminus S^\prime} s \iff \forall s \in S\ \forall s^\prime \in S^\prime\ s \neq s^\prime \implies \texttt{id}_{P}(s)$
where $=$ is treated as an element-wise syntactic equality.

However, what would it mean to subtract one apple from two cars? It
would mean exactly nothing and so, subtraction on such numbers are
defined as shown below:

$$(P, S) - (P^\prime, S^\prime) = (\varnothing, S \setminus S^\prime)$$

The primary definition being the empty set (i.e., $\varnothing$) does,
in fact, tell us that there is no such grounded or impure number defined
on such a subtraction.

### Defining multiplication

When multiplying two numbers, one needs the semantics concerning the
operands. That is to say, one of the operands needs to encapsulate the
objectness and the other one amount of repetition (of addition or
existence of the objectness). For this reason, let the left operant to
denote a grounded number and the right operand to denote a pure number.
Now, let's define the multiplication as shown below:

$$(P, S) \cdot (\top, S^\prime) = (P, S \times S^\prime)$$

where $P \times \top \sim P$. Note that it should be obvious that to
obtain a pure number as the result, one could easily use two pure
numbers as the operands, and in that way the multiplication operation
would also make sense for pure numbers too.

While it would make sense to multiply any type of number (i.e., grounded
or pure) by a pure number, it does not simply make sense to multiply two
grounded numbers. One obvious reason for this would be the following:
what would you expect 3 cars multiplied by 2 apples to mean and be
equal? That's why it just does not make any sense.

# Retrospection

Pure numbers, according to my definition, omit the notion of primary
definition, however, they keep the notion of distinct secondary
definitions. So, two pure numbers with $n$ distinct primary definitions
are still distinct numbers even though they represent the same quantity
$n$ (e.g., 3 fireplaces versus 3 garages). If we omitted the secondary
definitions too, we could call them \"the purest numbers\". We could do
so by writing

$$0 = (\top, \varnothing)$$

$$1 = (\top, \top)$$

$$2 = (\top, \{\varnothing, \top\})$$

Such numbers are indeed very similar to the numbers defined by John von
Neumann in the elementary set theory:

$$n^+ = n \cup \{n\} \sim \{s_1, \cdots, s_{n+1}\}$$

But what if I just wanted to add two numbers up? Since the secondary
definition of bigger or equal number would include the secondary
definition of the other, the result would be equal to that bigger or
equal number all the time (e.g., $1 + 1 = 1$). To prevent this from
happening, we could always assume the following:

$$\forall n, m\ s(n + m) = s(n) \times \{0\} \cup s(m) \times \{1\}$$

$$\ \forall n, m\ s(n - m) = s(\hat{n}) \setminus s(\hat{m})$$

where $s(\hat{m}) \subset s(\hat{n})$ and there exists a pair of
bijections such that $\hat{n} \sim n$ and $\hat{m} \sim m$. Although it
is trivial to do the same for the primary definitions in this case, I
would like to write them down as well:

$$\forall n, m\ p(n + m) = \{x \vert x \in p(n) \lor x \in p(m)\}$$

$$\forall n, m\ p(n - m) = \{x \vert (p(n) = p(m) \iff x \in p(n)) \land (p(n) \neq p(m) \iff x \in \varnothing)\}$$

second of which means that $p(n-m) = p(n)$ if and only if p(n) = p(m)
and $p(n-m) = \varnothing$ otherwise:

$$\forall x\ x \in p(n-m) \iff [(p(n) = p(m) \iff x \in p(n)) \land (p(n) \neq p(m) \iff x \in \varnothing)]$$

Last but not least, if one wanted to capture the existence of an object,
say, in the first-order logic then it could be done by constructing a
sentence which contains the conjunction of all the descriptions (or
first-order sentences for this matter) used in the primary and secondary
definitions of an object predicated on the object itself.

$$\bigwedge_{p \in P} p(\text{'}(P, S)\text{'}) \land \bigwedge_{s \in S} s(\text{'}(P, S)\text{'})$$

Here is an example for the \"an apple on the table\" object:

$$\text{Red}(\textit{RedAndRoundOnTable}) \land \text{Round}(\textit{RedAndRoundOnTable} \land \text{OnTable}(\textit{RedAndRoundOnTable})$$

# Conclusion

I spent significant amount of time while I was developing these concepts
from scratch and I definitely enjoyed it very much. During the process,
I also realized that it is really not that easy to understand numbers
and operations (I used to tease one of my group mates by asking him
whether he believes that he could really understand the wisdom of
addition), and what they are operating on in our imaginary world (i.e.,
objects).

I still find quite interesting ideas when I look back at this probably
underdeveloped concepts of mine. While the general notions of
objectness, numbers, and operations are hopefully insightful and
intuitive, there is also beauty in the technical details. For an
example, it sounds somewhat philosophical for the commonality
property $\top$ to exist in all perceivable objects. However, almost
jokingly, its only element $\varnothing$ is what defines a non-object
(by invalidity or absurdity).
