---
layout: post
author:
- Ali Khudiyev
title: "Drama of Academia"
date: 2025-03-11 16:00:00 +0400
categories: archive academia other
---

# The Fall

The word \"academia\" used to carry a heavy weight, lifting which
required one's serious consideration and commitment. Although the
ideological foundations of academia sound very desirable, even to this
day, the practical implementation of those ideas has not yet come to
fulfill the desired standards. In fact, the implementation of academic
procedures is so significantly and very visibly different that you would
have a hard time believing the good intentions of the first caveman who
carved glyphs onto a rock. Let's look at 5 core ideaological foundations
of the academia:

- The scientific process must be in the pursuit of knowledge for truth's
  sake only.

- Scientific claims and statements ought to be scrutinized in a
  truth-seeking manner without involving one's emotions, personal
  biases, malicious intentions, reputation, and status.

- Science ought to be as accessible as possible to the public without
  any discrimination.

- Academic freedom must be everyone's right to be able to question
  and/or doubt even the \"prohibited\".

- Scientific discoveries and inventions ought to be pursued in the good
  faith that they will benefit society.

Sounds nice, right? I bet it does. Guess what, though? The 5 principles
mentioned above do not dictate how things should be anymore. Let's see
how:

- Incentives in academia often lean towards reputation and status.

- Many academic institutions and universities allow unfairness and
  unjust judgements in the evaluation of one's scientific work based on
  discriminatory factors such as status.

- Administrative and financial processes in academia have become a
  burden on students' lives.

- Students are hesitant to ask the \"dumb\" questions because of the
  humiliation of the so-called education givers, let alone openly doubt
  the \"prohibited.\"

- Scientific achievement is sometimes claimed unethically without any
  academic integrity, only benefiting the self.

The drama of the academia is its fall stemming from its trembling knees
and weakening backbones. The drama of the academia is in its disservice
to real science. The drama of academia is in the stained academic values
derailed from their origins. The fall of academia is due to the
political, bureaucratic, and self-interest-driven regulations
overshadowing the true essence of the scientific process.

# Potential Solutions

## Freedom of Thought

The first part of the solution is to have freedom of thought in the
scientific community. Freedom of thought may sound like another name for
freedom of speech, but it is something slightly different, in my
opinion. I am not saying you should be able to say whatever the hell you
want to say. Freedom of thought is about being able to think whatever
the hell you want to think. The two concepts are obviously different in
this regard. In today's academic standards, one is not even capable of
thinking freely because such an ability is constantly being taken away
from us. As unfortunate as it may sound, it is what has been happening
over the decades. I don't know how much of it has been intentional. You
see, if you take one's freedom of thought away, you can let him keep his
freedom of speech. Having the right to speak your mind freely does not
mean you will say something sensible and actually revolutionary without
coming up with the right thought in your mind first. Speech is a part of
actualized thought, like a limb movement. Once you don't have the free
thought to begin with, you won't get the desired by-product. So, this
subtle difference may even potentially be used to falsely persuade
people to believe in the power and fairness of the rights they were
given. It is like letting someone buy as many expensive cars as he
wants, but only giving him 5 bucks for it. It is not too hard to get the
smell of hypocrisy in the air sometimes.

To implement freedom of thought, an academic institution must change its
policy from maximizing the institutional rankings (for feeding
self-interests) to maximizing independence in problem-solving among
students, researchers, and fellow scientists. The Goodhart law - when a
measure becomes the target, it ceases to be a good measure - holds for
academic institutions and universities. When having a higher graduation
rate (or something like that) becomes the target, you get what you
optimize for, resulting in a perverse incentive where students start
memorizing subject(s) for efficiency, teachers and professors down
notching difficulty of exams for preserving their jobs, organizations
collecting money from students' misfortune/retakes making it a strong
burden in their future, and so on. Where is the science on that? Where
is the freedom of thought? Let students think on their own, unafraid of
public humiliation, because the opposite creates insincere, fake clowns.
Let them be creative and independent while solving problems, because the
opposite creates dumb asses who end up polluting the workspace of those
who are really passionate about what they do. Let them be proud of their
little yet self-earned discoveries and inventions instead of laughing at
them for their works' imperfections and flaws because the opposite
creates cowards scared of taking actions and doing something notable
once in their life.

## Reputation-Free Society

Humans possess the glance of egotistical evil in their nature. This
somewhat dark side of humans is very social and seeks constant
attention. Reputation must not be something people care about a lot
within the scientific community. It is the tastiest food of the
egotistical evil. In an actual academic system, one should not aim for
the possession of a higher reputation among others. What is worth aiming
for instead is to gain access to higher wisdom in order to solve
problems one wishes to solve. Reputation is only useful for guidance in
the scientific process of truth-seeking; it must not be used for reasons
such as unjustly suppressing the voices of those unpossessed with as
high reputation. In other words, reputation and status must not give
anyone the right to decide on behalf of others; instead, reputation and
status ought to be used to give guidance in good faith to those who
might need it.

Some people in academia may sometimes consider themselves or their work
very serious and almost holy in some sense to be able to stand one row
ahead of others. They may think that they have a very special character
or a god-given talent in some way. In fact, it is not specific to
academia, but I will only talk about academia since it is the main
subject of today's drama. Most of these people pretend to be very
sophisticated and sincere, but they do not appear very sophisticated or
sincere behind the curtains. Behind the masks lie control freaks. I do
not want to over-exaggerate things, but the fact that such egotistical
people get to decide and have a word on serious matters that affect
others' lives one way or another is a recipe for an uninformed labor
seeker to later get an intermittent explosive disorder when hit with the
harsh reality over and over again.
