---
layout: post
author:
- Ali Khudiyev
title: "Are you an original thinker?"
date: 2025-04-29 16:53:00 +0400
categories: archive miscellaneous other
---

Have you ever wondered whether you are an original thinker or a
stochastic parrot? Everyone has been told once to not cheat and copy
from others' honest work during a school presentation, a university
examination, a project submission, or a seminar about research ethics.
Is not getting help during a presentation or not copying answers during
an examination enough to make one an authentic, though? Is being an
original thinker all about passing your exams with dignity? Is not
getting caught by the plagiarism checking software after submitting your
dissertation all it takes? Obviously, it is not that simple. If
paraphrasing a godly amount of times made a person an original thinker,
then what would make a stochastic parrot? It doesn't quite fit, you see.
Let's start our journey by trying to understand the distinction between
an invention and a discovery in science.

# Invention or Discovery?

What is an invention? Invention is something you come up with that is
helpful to represent your observations and/or intuitions, but is not a
by-product of a rigorous logical reasoning process. Discovery, on the
other hand, is something that is a true fact, which follows from
rigorous logical reasoning. Ask yourself: Is $a^2 + b^2 = c^2$ (where
$a$ and $b$ denote the adjacent sides, and $c$ denotes the hypotenuse in
a right triangle on a 2D Euclidean space) an invention or a discovery?
Did someone come up with this equality to merely ease our lives, or did
this equality emerge from something else? The answer is obviously a
discovery. But what invention led to this discovery? Well, it might have
been many things, but certainly the invention of numbers is up there.
Each time a scientific discovery is made, there needs to be a
\"scientific\" invention behind it. The way you can look at it is that
all the axioms of mathematics are inventions, and the rest (e.g.,
lemmas, theorems) are discoveries. Axioms are not proven by the
definition, so you cannot discover them scientifically. You can only
invent axioms scientifically by discovering them intuitively in the
wild. However, I will stick to the scientific side of invention and
discovery in this post for simplicity.

When a scientific discovery is made, we mainly associate the thing
discovered with the person who discovered it and acknowledge others
whose work contributed to the discovery indirectly. In other words, we
don't say the person who came up with the notion of natural numbers and
basic arithmetic operations, such as addition and multiplication, owns
the whole field of mathematics and therefore, is, without a doubt, more
intelligent than every human being who ever lived after his/her time. In
fact, the person who came up with numbers and operators could not have
possibly thought of all the implications and consequences simply because
his life span wouldn't even be long enough to speak about all the
implications internally using an inner voice. So, there is something
about spending man-hours on something to deserve an association.
However, it cannot be all that is required because otherwise, spending
thousands of hours on paraphrasing others' work would be worthy of an
association. There needs to be something that gives the many hours being
spent integrity.

The thing that makes a body of work crucial to the progress of science
is novelty. Whether it is an invention or a discovery, there obviously
needs to be a novelty in it. Otherwise, it is neither an invention nor a
discovery, but rather a work of paraphrasing. Novelty isn't necessarily
a by-product of an invention; it can come out of a discovery since the
human brain is not capable of knowing all the implications of, say, a
set of axioms invented. So, even if it is a tautology, it can be the one
previously unthought of. However, not all tautologies are
\"interesting\" discoveries. For example, I can come up with an
arithmetic expression $E=1+4-2-(-1+5)+3-\cdots=1$ that has never been
thought of by anyone, but it wouldn't be enough to make it an
\"interesting\" discovery because people won't be able to relate it to
other scientific inventions or discoveries. While this funny expression
may actually carry some significant meaning in the very far future, it
is impossible to recognize it as an interesting discovery because it is
a dangling node in the graph of scientific facts. The interestingness of
something is a kind of synonym for its relevancy to other things. Coming
up with something that is too relevant to many other findings makes the
invention/discovery very interesting.

# Original Thinker

Being an original thinker is not on a binary spectrum, where you either
are or aren't one. It is rather a matter of how much of an original
thinker you are. Being an original thinker is not all about coming up
with everything from scratch, either. An original thinker is someone who
is an inventor or a discoverer; obviously, some level of novelty must be
present in an original thinker's work in both cases. An original thinker
is someone who has many intuitions, most of which turn out to be false
later on. An original thinker is someone who doesn't follow the paths
that lead somewhere already known. An original thinker is someone who
explores many different (sometimes unrelated) branches on the path being
followed; if the path is very linear, then the person is probably a
faker. An original thinker is someone who is not afraid of diving into
the first principles to have a better understanding. An original thinker
is someone who tends to listen to his/her own gut feeling more than what
others say. An original thinker is someone with perseverance and strong
determination for achieving his/her ambitious goals. An original thinker
is someone who always tries to do honest work with integrity and doesn't
cheat. An original thinker is someone who has a strong curiosity and a
willingness to learn something new. An original thinker is someone who
is capable of pursuing an idea/intuition even when that idea may have
been considered boring or uninteresting by many other great people. An
original thinker is someone who has the freedom of thought, capable of
thinking about the imaginary, questioning the unquestionable, doubting
the undoubtable, poking around the forbidden.

Now, you can see for yourself how many of these character traits you
possess to get a rough feeling for your level of original thinking.
