---
layout: post
author:
- Ali Khudiyev
title: "Losing the illusion"
date: 2025-04-28 12:34:00 +0400
categories: archive fun
---

Some people wonder what will happen when we have super-intelligent
AIs... Will we lose our purpose in life? Will life be worth living? Or
do we need to stop working on AI immediately? If you are afraid of
losing your purpose in life post-AI, then it might be time for you to
re-evaluate it pre-AI.

# The Illusion

It is easy to think that we have a purpose in our lives, each person
fighting for their flame of life. One quick way of finding purpose in
what you are doing is by turning to a religion and accepting your
mission as you are told in the book. Many people would be satisfied with
such an approach to life - that's how the ancient religions survived
through the history of human evolution. Old religions somehow were
capable of clawing into the large groups of human brains. However, let's
put the religion aside and make a case for people living their lives
without believing in one. How do these people live? Do they have a
purpose in life? Well, if you think religious people can live because it
is the religion that gives one a purpose in life, then your view of life
is not absolutely right. A purpose, my friend, is the greatest illusion
in life, even greater than the religion itself. A purpose can be
anything, including the things brought by your religion. If you don't
believe in any religion, then you find a non-religious purpose in your
life; you create your own purpose, your own religion in a sense. You may
think your grand purpose in life is to become a millionaire, or to make
a great scientific contribution to be remembered by, or to have a
family, or something else... Whatever your purpose might be, it is an
illusion... an illusion that gives a meaning to your actions... that
helps you to judge and improve in your own terms. If every action you
take in life were utterly meaningless and incomparable to any other,
then why would you take any? The word \"meaning\" carries a heavy load
here. So, let's break it down. A meaning is something that emerges after
you question the reasonableness of an action you take toward your
purpose. If an action you take helps you get closer to where your
purpose demands you to be, then it is a meaningful one; otherwise, you
will get the feeling of wasting time on a bunch of nonsense. That means,
when people ask about the meaning of life, they are actually asking
about the purpose of their lives. Because without a purpose, there is no
meaning to anything. This is not to say that after having a purpose, you
get the true meaning of things in life. If your world model is not good
enough to make accurate predictions, the true meaning of your actions
may be different than what is revealed to your first-person experience.
This much being said about the meaning, let's get back to the illusion
part once again.

Should we be worried because our purposes are illusions? How would I
know? Whether your worry has a meaning to it or is a complete waste of
your time depends on what your purpose is, remember? So, if you find
yourself meaningfully worrying about whether your purpose is an illusion
or not, then somewhere in your \"purpose\" paragraph encoded in your
brain, there is probably a sentence telling you that it needs to be
real. Some people would worry if they have a real purpose in life
because of this sentence, and some people would not worry at all because
their world model told them the purpose they have is as real as it gets.
What happens underneath is still to be speculated about. Do they
internally inject bias into their world models to believe that their
purpose is not an illusion, so that they can live a worry-free life
(from this aspect at least)? Or have their world models just evolved to
believe this? Who knows..? However, they are not the ones who live
without bothering if their purpose is real; there is another group of
people who are also not bothered by this. It is the group of people who
think that their purpose is an illusion and always will be, regardless
of the thing(s) they choose to pursue in life. They don't have to bother
because their purpose tells them it doesn't need to be real... at least
more real than their lives are. Besides these people, there are others
whose purpose tells them it needs to be real, but their world models
predict \"nothing is real\", and these people may usually end up getting
depressed or killing themselves eventually. This is such a serious
matter for people because our brains tend to constantly overwhelm us
with questions that we are incapable of answering.

# Are we better off dead?

Let's assume that all the things you could have ever done are already
being done by some entity called a super-intelligent agent. What would
you feel? You read a book, the agent can also read a book... faster than
you. You are a good drawer, the agent can also draw pictures... with
finer details. You are an F1 racer, the agent can also drive a car...
with more accuracy and control. You are a programmer, the agent can also
write code... with no bugs and more efficiency. You are a TV news
propagandist, the agent can also make propaganda and grift... with more
social engineering and deceptiveness. If this kind of future is what
awaits us ahead, a lot of people may get upset when they realize what
they been considered very good at doing is now stolen away from them or
when they realize their purpose in doing those things was not the
purpose they thought they followed. Humans being humans, you know: the
paradoxical nature of humans. We want two things to happen
simultaneously, but one of the things cannot coexist with the other. Yet
we fail to understand it; if it sounds good enough, we want to have it
no matter what... even if it is literally impossible sometimes. So,
let's continue with our imaginary \"super-intelligent agent making us
obsolete\" thing.

It is time to ask yourself to what extent you love the thing you love
doing. Would you still be doing it if it weren't profitable? Would you
still be doing it if you worked in a different job? Would you still be
doing it if it made you lose sleep at night? Would you still be doing it
if it meant losing some of your relationships? If you answer \"yes\" or
something that goes in the line of \"I would try doing it\", then the
super-intelligent agent will probably not break your will. It may make
you broke, but it will not be able to blow off your flame easily. The
thing about our purpose is that many of us want to live a life with good
earnings, and we sometimes lie to ourselves by telling ourselves that
what we are really passionate about is the job we are doing. Underneath,
many of us may not have ever witnessed what poverty feels like, what
starvation feels like, what suffering feels like... There is a dark face
of this world that many of us haven't faced. It is these dark times that
show what one is really passionate about. If you are working in a job
you hate because you don't want to starve to death, but you are trying
to do the thing you really love whenever you find a chance in the
madness of life, then that sounds like a passion. You may want to get a
better job to earn more and live more comfortably, but if this is your
whole identity and purpose in life, then the agent may wreck you pretty
easily. Why? Because all you care about is the external material instead
of the pursuit of what lies within. There are some things that no amount
of money can buy... I will give an example to illustrate my point: you
can earn a billion dollars a day and still not have a good physique and
a healthy body; you can earn a billion dollars a day and still be dumb
and ignorant. There are things that you have to put your effort into in
order to possess them. Even if it were possible to literally buy
anything with money and you were still broke, then you would still need
to do something to get what you want, unless you decide to kill
yourself. The middle ground between life and death is pathos; it is not
quite like living and not quite like dying.

Are you still afraid of the agent? The agent can earn vastly more money
than you ever will, but it cannot improve on your behalf. You can
improve on your own behalf. It cannot enjoy doing the thing you love
doing on your behalf. You can enjoy doing the thing you love doing on
your behalf. Chess players have turned into little kids playing chess
against chess bots. Winning the bots may have become impossible at this
point. Do we see lots of chess players hanging themselves from bridges
all over the world? No. Why? Because they are probably after the
pleasure they get from playing chess, discovering something new about
themselves, as well as the game of chess, by playing. If you are not
doing the thing you highly speak of when crowded, when you are alone,
then you do not really highly think of it, neither when alone nor when
crowded.
